



Media Over QUIC                                                  M. Duke
Internet-Draft                                                    Google
Intended status: Standards Track                        24 February 2026
Expires: 28 August 2026


                     The Rewind Subscription Filter
                 draft-duke-moq-subscribe-rewind-latest

Abstract

   This document proposes a Media Over Quic Transport (MOQT) extension
   that enables a new Subscription Filter, so that a subscriber can
   request that a finite number of past groups be delivered with
   SUBSCRIBE semantics (multiple streams, potentially incomplete) rather
   than FETCH semantics (single stream, complete, head-of-line-
   blocking).  Service of this request is best-effort by the publisher,
   and it intended to accelerate joining a track in some use cases.

About This Document

   This note is to be removed before publishing as an RFC.

   The latest revision of this draft can be found at
   https://martinduke.github.io/draft-duke-moq-subscribe-rewind/draft-
   duke-moq-subscribe-rewind.html.  Status information for this document
   may be found at https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-duke-moq-
   subscribe-rewind/.

   Discussion of this document takes place on the Media Over QUIC
   Working Group mailing list (mailto:moq@ietf.org), which is archived
   at https://mailarchive.ietf.org/arch/browse/moq/.  Subscribe at
   https://www.ietf.org/mailman/listinfo/moq/.

   Source for this draft and an issue tracker can be found at
   https://github.com/martinduke/draft-duke-moq-subscribe-rewind.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on 28 August 2026.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2026 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.  Code Components
   extracted from this document must include Revised BSD License text as
   described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are
   provided without warranty as described in the Revised BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction
   2.  Conventions and Definitions
   3.  Overview
   4.  Publisher restrictions
     4.1.  Restrictions Specific to Relays
   5.  Options and Parameters
     5.1.  Setup Option MAX_REWIND
     5.2.  Subscription Filter Rewind
     5.3.  REWIND_GROUPS Message Parameter
   6.  Security Considerations
   7.  IANA Considerations
   8.  Normative References
   Acknowledgements
   Author's Address

1.  Introduction

   In MOQT [MOQT], tracks are delivered via atomic Objects that are
   organized into Groups, which serve as join points, and Subgroups,
   that imply dependency between Objects and serve as the units to be
   fed into QUIC or Webtransport streams.

   Subscribers can send SUBSCRIBE messages to receive messages that
   arrive at, or are created by, the publisher in the future.  Such
   messages are delivered either one stream per Subgroup, or in QUIC
   Datagrams, as dictated by the original publisher.  The stream mapping
   allows Objects that are no longer of use to the subscriber to not be
   sent or retransmitted without blocking later Objects.

   Subscribers can also send FETCH messages to retrieve Objects from the
   past.  The requested Object range is delivered on a single stream and
   cannot omit Objects that exist at the original pulbsher.  If the
   entirely of the Object range is not in cache, a relay will have to
   issue its own FETCH upstream to satisfy the subscriber.

   Because the subscriber may not know the live edge at request time, a
   variant of FETCH known as "Joining FETCH" instructs the publisher to
   use the current live edge as the end of the Object range.  A
   "Relative Joining FETCH" defines the start of the Object range
   relative to the live edge.  For instance, a Relative Joining FETCH
   might request two Groups prior to the live edge, which would deliver
   the two latest complete Groups as well as all Objects in the current
   Group before the live edge.  Joining FETCH uses the same delivery
   semantics as other FETCH: all Objects are delivered in order on a
   single stream.

   In some use cases, this behavior is not optimal.  The subscriber
   might not need the delivery guarantees associated with FETCH if
   Objects will arrive too late to be useful.  Furthermore, if some of
   the FETCHed Objects are available in cache, they might have to wait
   for other, blocking Objects to be delivered from upstream.

   This document describes the Subscribe Rewind extension, which
   specifies a new Subscription Filter type "Rewind", allowing the
   subscriber to request SUBSCRIBE semantics for some groups before the
   live edge.  The publisher only honors the request if it is able to do
   so from cache.

2.  Conventions and Definitions

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and
   "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in
   BCP 14 [RFC2119] [RFC8174] when, and only when, they appear in all
   capitals, as shown here.

3.  Overview

   Each endpoint sends the MAX_REWIND option in its SETUP message.  The
   MAX_REWIND option contains an integer that indicates the maximum
   number of groups that the peer might request in a Rewind subscription
   filter.  If zero, the peer may only request the current group.  If
   absent, the peer MUST NOT send the Rewind subscription filter.  This
   option is half-duplex; if an endpoint does not send the option, but
   receives it, it MAY use the Rewind Subscription Filter.

   An endpoint might populate the MAX_REWIND option by reporting how
   many Groups it habitually stores in cache to answer FETCH or service
   subscribers that are behind on delivery.  Other heuristics are also
   possible, especially if Group IDs do not increment by one.

   A subscriber sends a SUBSCRIBE message and can include a Rewind
   Subscription Filter instead of some other Subscription filter type.
   A value of zero indicates it would like to receive the entire current
   group; a larger value indicates it would also like to receive the
   most recent complete groups as well.

   If the subscriber wants the Groups even if SUBSCRIBE delivery
   semantics are not available, it MAY also send a Joining FETCH
   message.  The object range MAY be larger or smaller than specified in
   the Rewind filter.

   Upon receipt of a Rewind filter, the publisher MAY treat it as a
   Largest Object filter.  It will typically do so if the track is not
   in cache.  If it does not do so, it sends a REWIND_GROUPS parameter
   in the SUBSCRIBE_OK.  REWIND_GROUPS is an integer that indicates the
   number of Groups before the LargestObject parameter that will be
   served via SUBSCRIBE.

   Groups included in the Rewind Groups range will be delivered using
   SUBSCRIBE semantics: datagrams or Subgroup streams, subject to the
   delivery timeout and group order specified in the SUBSCRIBE
   negotiation.  Groups serviced via the Rewind filter are not delivered
   by any Joining FETCH associated with this SUBSCRIBE, though they can
   be delivered by Standalone FETCH messages.  In some cases, this means
   the Joining FETCH delivers an empty range.

   If the Joining FETCH range exceeds the Rewind range, the EndLocation
   reported in FETCH_OK is the highest Group ID outside the Rewind
   range.

4.  Publisher restrictions

   If the SUBSCRIBE message includes the FORWARD parameter with value 1,
   the publisher MUST NOT send the REWIND_GROUPS parameter in
   SUBSCRIBE_OK.

   The publisher MUST NOT include a Group in a range defined by Rewind
   Groups unless:

   *  There are objects in cache for the Group, and

   *  Some objects in cache have either Datagram forwarding preference,
      or are known to constitute the beginning of a Subgroup;

   *  The DELIVERY_TIMEOUT parameters for the SUBSCRIBE indicate the
      Group can still be sent.

   The publisher is not required to verify that it has all objects in
   the Group to include it in Rewind Groups range.  In particular,
   Groups delivered via SUBSCRIBE might be missing objects and are still
   eligible for Rewind.

   The publisher MAY choose to report fewer groups than what meet these
   conditions.  It might do so because the volume of data implied would
   consume too many resources, because it knows the current group is
   about to end, or due to any other policy.

   As with any other SUBSCRIBE, if a publisher receives two streams for
   the same Subgroup from upstream, and cannot account for all object
   IDs between the end of one and the beginning of another, it MUST NOT
   deliver them on the same stream.  It MAY simply omit the stream with
   higher object IDs.

   The publisher MUST NOT send Rewind Groups > 0 if it knows it is
   servicing a track with Group IDs that are not strictly increasing.

4.1.  Restrictions Specific to Relays

   If the publisher is a Relay, it has further restrictions.

   If there is an existing upstream Subscription for the track, and the
   Relay can otherwise send an immediate SUBSCRIBE_OK, then the included
   REWIND_GROUPS range MUST either:

   *  have a starting Location smaller than the LargestObject of the
      upstream SUBSCRIBE; or

   *  have Objects in cache for each Group with a Group Id less than or
      equal to the Group ID in the upstream Largest Object.

   If a relay does not have an existing upstream SUBSCRIBE for the
   track, it SHOULD use a Rewind Groups filter with the same or larger
   value in its upstream SUBSCRIBE subject to the upstream's MAX_REWIND
   Setup Option.  When it receives a SUBSCRIBE_OK from upstream, it
   SHOULD forward the REWIND_GROUPS parameter to any Subscriber(s) that
   sent a Rewind Groups filter, reducing the value to no more than the
   value in each subscriber's filter.  It MUST NOT deliver Groups to a
   subscriber with a Group ID outside the reported range.

5.  Options and Parameters

5.1.  Setup Option MAX_REWIND

   In addition to the Setup Options in Sec 9.3.1 of [MOQT], the Setup
   Option MAX_REWIND (0x16) contains an integer that indicates the
   largest value that can be used in a Rewind Subscription Filter.  If
   it is missing, the peer MUST NOT send a Rewind Subscription Filter.

5.2.  Subscription Filter Rewind

   In addition to the Subscription Filter Types in Sec 5.1.2. of [MOQT],
   add filter type Rewind (0x16).  The format is as follows:

   Subscription Filter {
     Filter Type (vi64) = 0x16,
     Rewind Groups (vi64),
   }

   A Rewind Groups of zero means that the subscriber requests SUBSCRIBE
   semantics from the beginning of the current group.  A larger integer
   value includes that many past Groups in addition to the current
   Group.

   The Rewind Groups field MUST NOT exceed the value in the peer's
   MAX_REWIND Setup Option and the filter type MUST NOT be sent if the
   Option was absent.  In either, case, the publisher should terminate
   the session with error PROTOCOL_VIOLATION.

5.3.  REWIND_GROUPS Message Parameter

   In addition to the MessageParameters in Sec 9.2 of [MOQT], add Rewind
   Groups (0x16).

   It represents the number of groups before the LargestObject that will
   be delivered via SUBSCRIBE semantics.

   If the parameter is sent in response to a Subscription Filter other
   than Rewind, has a value greater than the Group ID of Largest
   Location, or exceeeds with error PROTOCOL_VIOLATION.

   The publisher MUST truncate the end of any Joining FETCH related to
   this SUBSCRIBE to end before Object zero of the Group encoded by
   REWIND_GROUPS.  This might result in empty object ranges.  The
   Subscriber MUST close the session with error PROTOCOL_VIOLATION if
   the ranges overlap.

6.  Security Considerations

   To the extent this reduces head-of-line-blocking and replaces
   upstream FETCHes to satisfy Joining FETCH at the relay, it can reduce
   resource consumption at publishers.

   However, SUBSCRIBE semantics consume more QUIC or Webtransport
   streams.  Past Groups might contain a lot of data, and FETCH delivery
   is contained on a single stream to simplify the flow control of this
   data.  Publishers, who are aware of the content of their cache,
   SHOULD limit the range encoded by the REWIND_GROUPS parameter when is
   likely to overwhelm the channel or the subscriber.

7.  IANA Considerations

   Please add 0x16 (REWIND_GROUPS) to the Message Parameters registry.

   There is no Setup Option registry, but if one arises, please add 0x16
   (MAX_REWIND) to it.

8.  Normative References

   [MOQT]     Nandakumar, S., Vasiliev, V., Swett, I., and A. Frindell,
              "Media over QUIC Transport", Work in Progress, Internet-
              Draft, draft-ietf-moq-transport-16, 13 January 2026,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-ietf-moq-
              transport-16>.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc2119>.

   [RFC8174]  Leiba, B., "Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in RFC
              2119 Key Words", BCP 14, RFC 8174, DOI 10.17487/RFC8174,
              May 2017, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8174>.

Acknowledgements

   Ian Swett designed many components of this proposal.  Numerous
   members of the MOQ Working Group provided comments that refined our
   thinking.

Author's Address

   Martin Duke
   Google
   Email: martin.h.duke@gmail.com
